# Bataan Memorial Death March Training

This is my ([Cliff
Matthews](https://www.strava.com/athletes/58696205)) (aka [Young Lazy
deadhead](https://ctm.github.io/docs/yld/welcome.html)) collection of
training logs for the [Bataan Memorial Death
Marches](http://bataanmarch.com) (civilian heavy) that I've done in the
past as well as the one I'm doing on March 19th, 2023.  Although I did my
first BMDM in 2010, I didn't start these logs until [2017](2017.md),
which is a shame, since my [best time
(4:39:45.185)](https://bataanmemorialdeathmarch.itsyourrace.com/Results/6574/2016/35464/1524)
was in 2016.

So, in addition to [2017](2017.md), the others that I've logged in the
past are [2018](2018.md), [2019](2019.md), [2020](2020.md),
[2021](2021.md) and [2022](2022.md).

I've largely followed my schedule for [2023](2023.md).  It will be nice
to return to the White Sands Missile Range.

## What is the BMDM?

The Bataan Memorial Death March is a tribute to the men and women who
defended the Philippines at the onset of World War II.  They suffered
greatly and many perished either during the defense, after they were
surrendered and were forced to march (having subsisted on quarter
rations prior to the start of the march), at the inhumane prison
camps, in the hell-ships that carried them to Japan or in the forced
labor thereafter.

A few of those men and women, now in their nineties (or more!), are
still alive.  In 1989, members of the Army ROTC Department at New
Mexico State University started an annual march to honor these
veterans.  The march has grown considerably since then and although it
was initially open only to military members, they began allowing
civilians early on.  These days, participation is about half and half.
For the record, I am a civilian, although my father was in the Air
Force and there's a good chance at least one of my daughters will
serve.

## Why do I do it?

I attended my first BMDM in 2010.  I knew that in principle it was a
good cause, but it wasn't until I heard the vets tell their histories
that I was hooked.

Although that first march took me seven and a half hours and beat the
heck out of me, I decided to return each year as long as the original
vets were still coming out.  I also decided to volunteer for search
and rescue (SAR) since I realized I met the physical requirements and
knew that SAR was a tiny way I could say thanks with more than a word
and a handshake.

In addition to honoring veterans, training for BMDM kept me fit for
SAR missions, although I have not been a formal SAR member since
December 31st, 2020 due to how covid affected my former SAR team.

## How do I train?

I was totally unprepared my first year.  I did only four practice
hikes, each with a 35 pound pack, each with an increasing distance.
My hikes were in sandy terrain, because I had read about the sand
pits, and I wore hiking boots.  That was not a heavy enough pack to
train with; that wasn't enough training days, and the surface was too
soft.  So, when I attended my first BMDM, my feet hurt quite a bit by
mile six.  I could barely walk the last several miles.

Some of my previous years' training plans and logs have the history of
how I got to where I am, but basically from mid November until mid
March, I'll be doing a speed run with my pack every Wednesday and a
Saturday pack run that will alternate between a flat run with
forty-pounds and a 5 mile up and 5 mile down thirty-five pound pack
run at the local mountain. Specifically, my flat run will be done on
the Bosque Bike Path and my mountain run will be done on La Luz.

In addition to those pack runs, roughly every other week I'll also be
doing a pack run incorporating twelve 75 second all-out
intervals in the middle.  Sometimes the total distance for that pack
run will be as short as 5.6 miles. Other times it might be 8.9,
12.2 or 15.5, depending on how I'm feeling, the weather and how much
time I feel I can afford on a Monday.

In addition to my pack runs, I will also run without my pack the
remaining days of the week except Sunday, when I might ride my bike
(or run without my pack or run with my pack).

### Weight Training?

I do not currently do any weight training except my "weird" body
weight core exercises that I do on Tuesday and Thursday.  It is quite
possible that I would benefit from weight training, but what I've been
doing seems to work, more or less, and doesn't require me to leave my
house.  So, this section is for completeness of documentation and is
absolutely not a suggestion that anyone else do the same thing.  In
fact, if I continue racing BMDM beyond 2023, this is the section that
I'll probably change the most.


## Is this training plan safe?

No.  If you run with a pack, you risk injury.  I have worked up to
this training plan over several years.  A plan of doing _two_ pack
workouts a week with _some_ running and/or cycling in between is
probably doable for anyone who has already run a marathon or two,
although the times, distances and weight should probably be lessened.

## Base building

In previous years, my BMDM training began in mid November.  I was not
happy with my performance @ BMDM in March of 2017, so that year I
started doing Wednesday pack runs in late August.  I also stopped
tapering and taking recovery days after most of my August through
November races.

So, in my off season, although I only run with my pack on Wednesdays,
I still typically run five other days of the week and bike (or run) on
Sundays.

## Non-pack Days

During the week I do slow runs from my house out to Albuquerque
Academy, some distance around Albuquerque Academy and back to my
house.  On Sundays, in theory, I ride my bike.  How far I ride is
dependent on weather, mood, how much time I want to be out and to a
lesser extent how beat up I am from my Saturday activity.

On September 10th, I [fell pretty
hard](https://ctm.github.io/docs/yld/running/past/big_cottonwood_marathon_2022.html#bam)
on my left knee while running the [Big Cottonwood
Marathon](https://www.runrevel.com/bcm/video/view/16381).
Unfortunately, I've also fallen on it since.  As such, in the
beginning of the 2023 season, I'm _not_ running as much as is
described below.  The distances are what I was doing in previous
training seasons, but are currently aspirational.  If you want to see
what I'm actually running, you can [find me on
Strava](https://www.strava.com/athletes/58696205).

On Mondays I run from my house to Albuquerque Academy, run four laps
around AA then back to my house for a total of 15.5 miles. However,
after my second AA loop, I do twelve all-outs of seventy-five seconds
with only thirty seconds of rest in between.  I alternate between
doing my Monday run with a 40 pound pack and without a pack.

I used to try to keep my heart-rate at about 130bpm for my slow runs
and bike ride, but starting in April 2020 I began doing almost all my
exercise in a fasted state and often I find myself exercising at a
lower heart-rate.  I think my average HR in a fasted state is slowly
creeping up again, but I am not paying a huge amount of attention.

So, for the 2020-2021 training season, here were my non-pack days:

|Day|Activity|Amount|
|---|--------|------|
|Sunday|Bike Ride|30.5, 71 or 100 miles|
|every other Monday|Interval Training inside Slow Run|15.5 miles|
|Tuesday|Slow Run|15.5 miles|
|Thursday|Slow Run|15.5 miles|
|Friday|Slow Run|18.8 miles|

## Pack (and exception) days

In the following table, `speed` means as quickly as I can to minimize
the total time I spend. This year it may be about a 9:30 minute/mile
pace when running with my pack.  My speed during my non-pack races
(e.g., the Mt. Taylor Winter Quadrathlon) varies greatly.

`Race` is my race goal of 10:18 minute/mile.

`Mountain`: I'm running up and down a mountain and trying to minimize
my time.  I run the same mountain course every other weekend.  As my
fitness increases, so does my pace.  My record, in February 2016, was
a 14:15 minute/mile pace.

`Comfort`: I'll keep my HR between below 150bpm (typically 130bpm)
during the training or event.  I'm out there to have fun.

`Interval`: Interval training with my forty pound pack, wrapped with
enough low heart rate running on either end to be a total of 15.5
miles with an average heart rate of 130bpm.  The intervals themselves
are 12 all-outs of 75 seconds each, with 30 seconds of light running
as rest in between.

When I run from my house, I typically run over to Albuquerque Academy,
then run around it some distance before coming back.  As such, I
typically have to wait at a stoplight a couple of times or more and
it's hillier than the Bosque Bike path, which has neither stops nor
hills.

`Timed`: I aim to be on my feet a specific amount of time.  This is
not normally how I schedule an exercise, but it's a good compromise
when I am coming back after not having done a pack exercise in a while
or recovering from some other event.

### Packs

I started my 2023 season training using a Kelty Tioga 5500 my sister
and brother-in-law bought me after my previous one broke (on March
6th, 2021).  At some point, the bottom most horizontal tube broke and
I patched it with duct tape.  The duct tape held well, but I do not
want to risk one of the uprights breaking, so I bought a new pack and
will begin using it on Monday, February 6th, 2023.  Assuming no problems,
I'll continue to use that pack for training and competition.

So, it looks like my Tioga 5500s break every two years or so (2019,
2021).  That's disappointing, since the original one I had lasted much
longer and was used on a ton of search-and-rescue missions in addition
to training for and competing at BMDM. However, I realize that I'm an
outlier and that I push my equipment very hard.
